---
layout: default
image: /assets/images/hackers-1.jpg
title: git collab assignment
---

<style>
h2 {
    margin-top: 30px;
}
h3 {
    margin-top: 30px;
}
pre {
    line-height: 1.25em;
}
pre code {
    font-size: 0.9em;
}
</style>


### Git conflicts
Git conflicts arise when changes to a repo are committed from two or more
different locations. This is usually a result of two developers collaborating
on the same code, but it can also arise when a single person is comitting 
changes to a repo, for example, if they commit changes both locally on their
laptop and remotely through the GitHub website. 

### What does a conflict look like?
Let's walk through an example using the repo `https://github.com/hackers-test/hack-program`. To keep things simple for now, we will make a conflict arise 
in the README file, caused by making a change to the same line both on my 
laptop and on GitHub. 

First, I opened my browser to the repo linked to above and clicked on the 
pen icon on the README file to edit it directly online. On the third line
of the README I then entered the text "Committed from GitHub" and committed
the change.

Next, I opened my local clone of the repo in my terminal. Here I also made
a change to the same README.md file, entering on the third line the text
"Committed from local". I then committed and tried to push the change.

```bash
git add README.md
git commit -m "..."
git push
```
<pre style="padding:10px; border: solid black">(base) 
To https://github.com/hackers-test/hack-program.git
 <font color="#CC0000">! [rejected]       </font> main -&gt; main (fetch first)
<font color="#CC0000">error: failed to push some refs to &apos;https://github.com/hackers-test/hack-program.git&apos;</font>
<font color="#C4A000">hint: Updates were rejected because the remote contains work that you do</font>
<font color="#C4A000">hint: not have locally. This is usually caused by another repository pushing</font>
<font color="#C4A000">hint: to the same ref. You may want to first integrate the remote changes</font>
<font color="#C4A000">hint: (e.g., &apos;git pull ...&apos;) before pushing again.</font>
<font color="#C4A000">hint: See the &apos;Note about fast-forwards&apos; in &apos;git push --help&apos; for details.</font>
</pre>


As you can see, we cannot push to the remote repo because it is currently one
or more commits ahead of our current branch. This actually doesn't yet mean 
that there is a conflict, but it means that we need to *check* for a conflict
by following the instructions, which tell us to perform a `git pull`. 

```bash
git pull
```
<pre style="padding: 10px; border: black solid">
Auto-merging README.md
CONFLICT (content): Merge conflict in README.md
Automatic merge failed; fix conflicts and then commit the result.
</pre>

This tells us that there is a conflict, and that is occurs in the README.md
file, and tells us that we need to fix it. So how do we do that?

### Resolving conflicts
When you made the `git pull` request above you accepted the changes from the 
remote main branch into your local main branch. Often people might create a
separate branch in which to pull these changes to ensure that you do not mess
up your main. Here we're taking a lazier approach. The message above told us
which files contain conflicts, so let's take a look at that file. What we 
will find is a conflict represented by text that has been inserted into our
code like the following:

```
<<<<<<< HEAD
Committed by Local.
=======
Committed by GitHub.
>>>>>>> af4e39e325cf414f268a0b75f41e1ff72a29322b
```

To understand this we first need to revisit some naming conventions from git. 
The term `HEAD` refers to the latest committed state of your current branch. 
Thus, anything in the section between `<<<<<<< HEAD` and `=======` represents
the code that was entered in our local repo. Alternatively, the code between 
`======` and `>>>>>>> ...` is code that was entered on the remote -- the code
we pulled in from somewhere else. The name of that commit is much uglier, in 
this case `af4e39e325cf414f268a0b75f41e1ff72a29322b`. This is just a random
hash value that is a unique signature of that specific commit. As you can 
see then, the format of a file that contains a conflict is to show both versions
of the code separated by the `=======` delimiter. Your job as the resolver is
to select which version of the code you want to keep.

To do this you can simply open the file in your favorite text editor. You must
remote the lines with arrows and the delimiter, and then leave just the code
you want to keep. So from the block above I would keep only the following 
after editing it. In this case you can see that I decided to keep a solution
that showed changes from both contributors. 

```
Committed by Local & GitHub.
```

Finally, you can now push your changes and they are ensured not to conflict
with any other changes on the remote, since you already pulled in and merged
all of the changes that were present on the remote.
```
git add README.md
git commit -m "resolved conflict"
git push
```

### Other places conflicts arise
In our first example a conflict was identified when we tried to perform a 
`git push` and git informed us that the remote already had merged commits that
would cause a conflict. Another place that a conflict can arise is when 
another user makes a pull request. For example, you may have made several commits
to your repo at the same time that they were working on a fork of the repo 
separately. By the time they make their pull request it now conflicts, and 
when you look at the pull request online it says it is not ready to merge due
to conflicts. 

At this point either you or the other user can make changes to the pull request
to resolve the conflicts. Make changes to a pull request you say? That's right.
You can think of a pull request as just another branch, and you can actually 
check it out. Remember, this was demonstrated briefly in the git-collab tutorial, 
where we checked out the 1st pull request.

```bash
# checking out pull request #1 as branch UserB
git fetch origin pull/1/head:UserB
```

The `git fetch` command is similar to `git pull`, in fact it is just a shortcut
for the saying `git fetch` and then `git merge`. In this case you delay merging
the other branch, which is the point at which the conflict arises. This is a
better way to avoid accidentally introducing errors into your main branch. Here
we checked out a pull request onto a separate branch, so let's now *switch* to 
that branch to work on the code, merge it with main, and then try to resolve 
any conflicts. 

```bash
# checkout the pull-request
git checkout UserB

# merge the local changes into it -- any conflicts will arise
git merge main

# open you editor to resolve the conflicts
# ...

# then commit and push back to GitHub
git add README.md
git commit -m "resolved conflict w/ PR #1"
git push origin UserB
```

The ending is a little confusing. We fetched a pull request, but then we 
eventually push to a branch, so what happens to the pull request? It turns
out that because a pull request is just a request to merge a specific branch,
when we push to update the branch it also updates the contents of the pull 
request. If the pull request previously said that it could not be merged 
because of conflicts, it will now be updated to say that it can be merged.
You can then go ahead and click to merge it on GitHub.


### This seems complicated
It is! It takes a long time to get comfortable with `git` to the level that 
you memorize the order in which to call all of these commands. Fortunately, 
there are hundreds of tutorials like this one around the web that you can 
search to help you whenever you have a question. Revisit them as often as you
need, and remember, `git` is a time machine, you can always rewind to former
committed state, so don't worry if you think you've totally broken your repo.
Seek help if you get stuck, and you'll figure it out.
