---
layout: default
image: /assets/images/hackers-1.jpg
title: git collab
---


## Git and GitHub Collaborative Practice

### Clone a repo to try it out
Let's start by cloning a GitHub repository. This is a typical thing we would do
if we wanted to try out a software tool that is publicly available. For this example
we will use this class repository. First navigate to the class GitHub page
at [https://github.com/eaton-lab/hack-the-planet](https://github.com/hack-the-planet)
and click on the green "Code" button to get the SSH URL. Then open a terminal 
and clone it to a local directory on your computer.

```bash
git clone git@github.com:eaton-lab/hack-the-planet.git
```

### A clone repo
We can now use the code in the repo, and we can even edit the code in this repo.
However, we do not have permissions to **push** changes we make to this code back
to the original repo. What if we decide that we do want to make changes and commit
them? This is where we would want to create a fork. What is a fork? It is just a 
copy of the repo that is hosted under your GitHub profile, so that you have ownership
of it, and is linked to the original repo, so that you can propose changes back to it.
Once a repository exists in multiple locations, we refer to these as **remotes**. The
_original_ remote is typically called **origin**. Other remotes can be called anything
you want. You can link multiple remotes to a single repository, such that you pull and
push code to each selectively. We can use the command `git remote` to view the remotes
that are currently linked.

```bash
# view the remotes
git remote -v
```

```
origin  git@github.com:eaton-lab/hack-the-planet.git (fetch)
origin  git@github.com:eaton-lab/hack-the-planet.git (push)
```

### Create a fork
Let's create a fork. Navigate back to the GitHub page and this time click on
the "Fork" button in the upper right. This will create a fork, and navigate
to a new page where your fork is located. Notice that it looks pretty much the
same, but your username appears near the top. Once again, click on the green
Code button to copy the git SSH URL. Now, we will add this URL as a remote
to our repo.

```bash
git remote add "upstream" {pasted-url}
```

```bash
# view the remotes
git remote -v
```

```
origin  git@github.com:eaton-lab/hack-the-planet.git (fetch)
origin  git@github.com:eaton-lab/hack-the-planet.git (push)
upstream  git@github.com:USERNAME/hack-the-planet.git (push)
upstream  git@github.com:USERNAME/hack-the-planet.git (push)
```

### Make edits on a branch

Now we can make edits to the code and push our changes to our forked
repo. Let's start by editing the REAMDE.md file. Don't worry about what
the changes are for now, this is just for practice. Open the README in 
any text editor and simply add a few characters of text to it, save, and
close the file. Then let's add our changes to git. BUT, notice that when
call push here we will specify the 'main' branch on the 'upstream' remote.

```bash
git add README.md
git commit -m "fixed typo in README"
git push upstream main
```

### View the fork and origin on GitHub

Now that many of us have pushed our commits to a fork, let's look at what
we see on GitHub. You should see on your fork that it is one commit ahead
of the origin. It will also suggest that you make a pull request to the
origin. Let's follow the instructions to do that.


### Reviewing a pull request
Next, let's check what the owner of the origin repo sees. They will see all
of the pull requests made by users and have the option to accept them, just like
we did in our first exercise today.