---
title: tut-2.1
---

# 2.1. Shell, variables, and PATH

## Operating systems
An operating system (OS) is the core software that manages hardware and software 
resources on a computer. It includes the __kernel__, whose core function is to 
communicate between hardware and software, and a core set of utilities (programs).
Examples of operating systems include Linux, MacOS, and Windows. MacOS and Windows
typically maintain a few versions of their OS at a time. By contrast, there are 
many different _distributions_ of Linux. These share the use of a Linux kernel, but
differ in the set of core software that they come with, and their default settings.

For this reason, you will see that the instructions we provide will sometimes 
differ slightly between Linux and MacOSX, and this extends to other Linux distributions
as well. The most commonly used Linux distribution is called __Ubuntu__, and this is
the distribution you will encounter when using WSL2, or an HPC cluster. Here
we will introduce the terminal, or shell, which is a software tool used to call
other software programs using commands. 

```bash
echo $OSTYPE
```
<pre class="stdout">
linux-gnu	
</pre>


## System software utilities
Your computer has a lot of software tools installed. Of course this includes
those you see on your desktop, like email and calendar, but it also includes
many smaller and simpler tools that you likely don't know about.
This includes some of the __core utilities__ that we've begun to learn about,
such `cd`, `ls`, and `echo`. 
These are stored in a location in your filesystem that is relatively
'deep' -- near the root (`/`) -- such as in `/bin` or `/usr/bin`. 
These folders are protected by your system such that they can only
be edited by users with administrative privileges. Which makes sense, 
you don't want to make changes to these programs and break them, or 
your system would be caput. 

Let's use the list program `ls` to list all of the programs in our `/bin` folder. Here
I'm showing only the first few lines of the output, as it contains hundreds of tools.
```bash
# see all the program names in /bin/
ls -l /bin/
```
<pre class="stdout">
total 659832
-rwxr-xr-x 1 root root        55744 Apr  5  2024 '['
-rwxr-xr-x 1 root root        14640 Mar 31  2024  411toppm
-rwxr-xr-x 1 root root        18744 Jul 18  2024  aa-enabled
-rwxr-xr-x 1 root root        18744 Jul 18  2024  aa-exec
-rwxr-xr-x 1 root root        18736 Jul 18  2024  aa-features-abi
-rwxr-xr-x 1 root root        22912 Apr  7  2024  aconnect
-rwxr-xr-x 1 root root         1622 Nov 30 13:21  acpidbg
-rwxr-xr-x 1 root root        16422 Aug 15 04:26  add-apt-repository
-rwxr-xr-x 1 root root        14720 Aug  8 22:33  addpart
lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root           26 Aug  7 06:15  addr2line -> x86_64-linux-gnu-addr2line
-rwxr-xr-x 1 root root        43552 Mar 31  2024  afm2pl
-rwxr-xr-x 1 root root        53824 Mar 31  2024  afm2tfm
-rwxr-xr-x 1 root root       158576 Apr  8  2024  airscan-discover
...
</pre>


If you scrolled down this list you would see that it even includes a program 
called `ls`. That's right, that file is the `ls` program executable itself. 
Note that although the program is located within the `bin` folder, we were able
to call `ls` from our shell without having to type the full path to its location.
This is because the software tools in `bin` are all accessible by default in the
shell. They are in our PATH (more on this below). However, we can also call 
programs from `bin` by writing the full path to the <i>executable</i> files. The
command below should yield the same output as the one above.

```bash
# call the ls program from /bin/
/bin/ls -l /bin/
```

## The Shell/Terminal
A shell provides an interface for users to interact with the operating system.
It is primarily used to execute commands, run scripts, and automate tasks. The
shell itself is a program. The most common shell programs are `bash` and `zsh`, 
but there are many alternative options. You can call the command below to find
the name of your shell. Take note, we will use this information later. 

```bash
echo $SHELL
```
<pre class="stdout">
/bin/bash
</pre>


### Shell variables
Most computer languages use variables as a way of <i>assigning</i>
an object to a name that can be used to reference it over and over again. 
Usually the `=` operator is used to assign variables (e.g., `x = 3`, but 
even this differs among languages (e.g., you may be familiar with the syntax
of `x <- 3` in R to assign variables). 
Variables can also be used in a shell or terminal. This is an example of the
shell being used as a _scripting language_. Shell scripting languages are 
not full programming languages, like C or Python, but provide a minimal 
framework for flow control to automate commands, including assigning variables. 
The example below is a shell script that stores a variable and then prints it
by calling the `echo` command. 

```bash
# store a variable
x=3

# retrieve the variable's value using $
echo $x
```
<pre class="stdout">
3
</pre>


### Default shell variables
As we learned in lecture, your shell stores a lot of information as variables
behind the scenes. This includes variables that tell it how to display colors 
and text in the terminal, how to keep track of its own history, how to generally
behave, and <i>importantly</i>, where to look for software or files that can be
executed without specifying their path, and found with tab auto-completion. We 
just saw some examples of these variables above when we queried the `$OSTYPE` and
`$SHELL` variables to learn about our system. These are variables that are 
automatically loaded and assigned when your terminal is opened. Even this behavior
can be modified, as we will learn about more below.


### The `PATH` variable
The `PATH` variable is a colon-separated list of filepaths describing the order
in which your shell searches directories for executable binaries -- programs
that can be called by name from the command line. This is referred to as a 
variable because it is a value that is temporarily stored to the name `PATH` 
when you open a terminal. Use `echo` in your shell to print the value of
your `$PATH` variable. A simple one might look like the example below:

```bash
# show the $PATH variable where software is searched
echo $PATH
```
<pre class="stdout">
/usr/local/bin:/usr/bin:/usr/sbin:/sbin
</pre>

The example above includes only the locations of system-wide software -- 
all of the paths are pointing to filepaths that are not in a user space, 
i.e., descended from `/home/username` on Linux or `/Users/username` on 
OSX. By contrast, and as we'll learn more about in the coming weeks, 
we will often wish to install 'local' software within our own user
spaces. This is software that will be completely isolated from the
system software that we definitely do not want to mess up. You can 
see in my PATH below that I have additional filepaths including 
`~/miniconda3/bin` and `~/gems/bin` (notice I'm using `~` as an alias
to reference my `/home/deren` prefix) that point to directories located
inside my home directory where additional programs are stored.

<pre class="stdout">
/home/deren/gems/bin:/home/deren/miniconda3/bin:/home/deren/miniconda3/condabin:/usr/local/sbin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/sbin:/usr/bin:/sbin:/bin:/usr/games:/usr/local/games:/snap/bin
</pre>


### The order of `PATH`
Your PATH variable can be modified and this can be very useful for 
specifying a particular version of a program when multiple versions are 
available. A key example of this is the program `python`. You can call
`python` from the command line to execute Python scripts. Your system
comes pre-installed with a version of Python that is used to run system-wide
software. <i>We generally do not want to use this version of Python for 
scientific programming</i>. This is because we cannot easily update or change
that version without affecting our entire operating system. So, instead, 
we will install a separate version of Python on our computers within our 
userspace (somewhere within your home directory) and we will tell the PATH
variable to use this one instead of the system-wide version. Do not try to
do this just yet, we will go through the process of installing Python later.
For now, let's focus on how we know which version is being used.

You can find the filepath to a program that is located in your PATH by using 
the `which` or `whereis` commands. This will help to make clear how the PATH
variable works. It is <i>ordered</i>. The first directory in the path is searched
first, and then the next one, and then the next one. If python occurs in the first
directory, then this version will supercede any programs with the name `python` 
occurring in directories that are listed later in the PATH variable. The 
`which` command will show you which precise program is at the top of your PATH,
where as the `whereis` command will list all programs that contain the target in their
name and are present in your PATH. I will show the results from my laptop, 
since I have multiple versions of `python` installed.

```bash
which python
```
<pre class="stdout">
/home/deren/miniconda3/bin/python
</pre>

```bash
whereis python
```
<pre class="stdout">
python: /usr/bin/python3.8 /usr/lib/python3.8 /usr/lib/python3.9 /usr/lib/python2.7 /etc/python3.8 /usr/local/lib/python3.8 /usr/include/python3.8 /home/deren/miniconda3/bin/python3.8-config /home/deren/miniconda3/bin/python3.8 /home/deren/miniconda3/bin/python
</pre>


## Dotfiles (preferences)
Dotfiles are <i>hidden files</i>, generally located in your home directory 
(e.g., `/home/deren` or `/Users/deren`), and which start with a dot (.) as
the first character in their filenames. By default, your shell and operating
system typically hide these files from your view, since you don't need to 
interact with them unless you are a hacker. 

Hacking these dotfiles can be really useful. They are files for setting 
preferences, and thus modifying them can make for a more pleasurable experience
when interacting with your terminal. Here we will edit one or more dotfiles to
add some basic customization to your terminal. You are welcome to do further 
customizations on your own (we provide some tips below). 
Your shell uses these dotfiles by reading and loading the variables in them
when the terminal is started. By editing the variables in the files we can
customize the behavior of the shell.

First, it is important to be sure which type of shell you have, since this 
will determine which dotfile name we need to ecdit. If you are in a bash terminal
then the file is `.bashrc`, if you are in the zsh terminal then is it `.zshrc`. 

We want to be careful when editing this file, since a bad configuration <i>can</i>
prevent your terminal from opening properly. If this happens, do not worry, it can
be fixed by opening the dotfile with a different system utility, like a graphical
text editor, and changing it back to its default settings. For this reason, let's 
start by creating a backup copy of our dotfile by using the `cp` command. When
typing the command below, be sure to specify the appropriate dotfile for your 
system -- you can ensure this by typing only the beginning of the filename and 
pressing tab to complete the filepath automatically. If the name does not 
autocomplete then you have already started to write the path incorrectly. Take note 
of where you are located when typing this (e.g., first run `pwd`) and remember 
that the dotfiles are located in your user home directory.

```bash
# ensure I am in my HOME, and then create backup of my .bash_rc
cd $HOME
cp .bashrc .bashrc_backup
```

### The `nano` text-editor
To edit a dot file, or any file, we will want to use a _text editor_. When working
in a terminal it can be very useful and efficient to use a terminal-based text editor
-- a program that opens right inside of the shell and can be used to edit files. A
very simple text editor that is usually installed by default is called `nano`. You can
open a file by typing `nano filename`. Watch the video below for a short tutorial on 
using `nano`. Note that it uses special key-bindings to accomplish some tasks, such as
saving and exiting, where you hold down the control key and press another at 
the same time.
<iframe width="100%" height="400" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/Jf0ZJZJ8jlI?si=bBYZJs3zwO120Ebx" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>

<!-- [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jf0ZJZJ8jlI).  -->


### Editing your dotfile

!!! alert

	<b>Complete the tasks in this section to earn points for the assignment.</b> 


For this assessment use `nano` to edit your shell's dotfile. We will add an 
alias, which is a new named variable that will serve as a shortcut to call a 
command that is more tedious to type. One that I find indispensible is the alias
`ll` (the lowercase letter L twice). We can create an alias in your dotfile by 
editing the file to add the following line to it:

=== "Linux/WLS2"
	```bash
	# open your shell's dot file in the 
	nano ~/.bashrc
	```

=== "MacOSX"
	```bash
	# open your shell's dot file in the 
	nano ~/.zshrc
	```	


You will see a lot of text in this file. These are the default preference settings
as well as many comments that are intended to direct you towards where to make edits
when you are making changes to this file. Scroll down until you find a section that
defines some aliases. Add the line below to this file and then save and exit.

```bash
alias ll='ls -l'
```

After you have made the edit, you must then re-load the dotfile, which can 
be done by either closing and re-opening the terminal, or by calling the
following:

=== "Linux/WLS2"
	```bash
	# open your shell's dot file in the 
	source ~/.bashrc
	```

=== "MacOSX"
	```bash
	# open your shell's dot file in the 
	source ~/.zshrc
	```	

Now that the alias is created and loaded when you type `ll` you should see 
the result that we expect to see when typing `ls -l`, which is to list the 
items in a directory with one item per line.

```bash
# call our new alias 
ll
```

If you get stuck in this section, try watching the videos below for step
by step instructions on customizing terminals.


### Optional: further customize your terminal
You do not need to follow all of the instructions in these videos, make
any changes that you find useful, and feel free to search for other tutorials
or videos for tips. Just take note that you must follow instructions for the 
appropriate shell type that you have (e.g., bash versus zsh). If you got stuck
on the section above, these videos might prove helpful to you.

- [A video on customizing an OSX bash terminal](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vDOVEDl2z84)
- [A video on customizing an OSX zsh terminal](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MSPu-lYF-A8)
- [A video on customizing a Windows-subsystem-for-Linux-2 terminal](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kY4Ns260i2k)


--------------

That's it, you can move on to the next tutorial. There is no required submission for this tutorial.

<!-- 
!!! alert 

	<b>Complete the tasks in this section to earn points for the assignment.</b> 

You should have already created a GitHub account in the previous tutorial. 
If not, please complete that assignment before proceeding. To get full points
for this assignment you must <b>upload</b> your shell's dotfile 
(`.bash_rc`, `.bash_profile`, or `.zshrc`) to a new GitHub repository
called "dot-files". 
hack-2-shell. You can do this by opening
your home folder, showing hidden files (those that start with a dot), and dragging
your dotfile to the GitHub repo to upload. Your dotfile must contain at least the
`ll` alias described above, any further changes are optional. 
-->

