---
title: tut-2.2
---

# 2.2. bash challenge

### How to approach the challenge
To solve the following problem sets try to find the answers by learning to use
the tools that have been introduced to you. Start by reviewing the lectures and
tutorials, then move on to google searching for tutorials on the tools or tasks
that are being asked. Also try the class chatroom. 
Please do not turn to AI bots as a first approach.
I encourage you to challenge yourself to try to understand the answers that 
you find. Only then should you optionally turn to a bot to ask if there is a
better or faster way to answer the question, and/or to provide an explanation
to you of why your answer works.

### The assignment
Your assignment is to create a new Markdown document on GitHub within your 
`hack-2-shell` repository from tutorial 2.0. To do this, navigate to the 
repository webpage and find the button that says <kdb>Add file</kdb>, and
then select "Create new file". Name the file `assignment.md`. This will
bring you inside of an interactive Markdown editor where you can type in
code and text and also preview it as rendered text.

Enter your answers to the problems below into this document using Markdown, while
following these instructions: (1) Label each question with a header; (2) write/copy
the question as plain text; (3) write a description of how you found a solution
to the problem in plain text; and finally (4) write a code-block with your solution.
You will use your terminal to find solutions to the problems, and then enter your 
answers into the Markdown document.
Below you can see an example response.

### Example Response

#### Question X: sort the string
Parse the string X into a list of elements and then use the `sort` command to
sort them in reverse alphanumeric order. `X="apples,bananas,oranges,pancakes"`.

I first looked for shell command to sort items and found the man page of `sort`. 
I see that it sorts lines of text, so I realized I need to first split the elements of X 
onto separate lines. Therefore, I looked for a string splitting command and found
the substitution tool `sed` to replace "," with "\n", which effectively splits a 
string into separate lines. This program works on files, so I need to feed my 
string X to it as if it were a file. I did this using a pipe from the program 
`echo` which reads text to stdout. Finally, I sorted the substituted text using
`sort` with the `-r` option to reverse it.

```bash
echo $x | sed 's/,/\n/g' | sort -r
```
```
pancakes
oranges
bananas
apples
```

!!! note

	Follow this same format to answer the 4 questions below and save your answers to your 
	markdown document on github. If you get stuck, ask your fellow classmates for help 
	on the shared gitter chatroom page.


### 1. Get the data files

Download the following data files from the internet using the curl command: 
`http://eaton-lab.org/pdsb/test.fastq.gz` and `http://eaton-lab.org/pdsb/iris-data-dirty.csv`. Use the `less` or `zless` commands to look at each file.
Describe what these commands do. 
Finally, use the `head` command to print the first 5 lines of the file `iris-data-dirty.csv`.


### 2. Clean the data

Use `grep`, `uniq`, and `sed` for this question. 
Check that all of the species names are spelled correctly in 
the file `iris-data-dirty.csv`. Also check for missing values stored as NA. Create a new
file where mispelled names are replaced with the correct values, and lines with NA are
excluded, and save it as `iris-data-clean.csv`. Use `cut`, `sort` and `uniq` to list the 
number of data values there are for each species in the new cleaned data file. Describe your work.


### 3. Find a sequence
Find how many lines in the data file `test.fastq.gz` start with "TGCAG" and end with "GAG". Describe your work. 


### 4. Find a sequence chunk
Using `grep` and other tools if necessary find all lines that contain the sequence "AAAACCCC" and for each print that line, the line above it, and two lines below it (so that a 4-line chunk around each search hit is printed). Describe your work. 



!!! alert 

	Do not forget to save your results in the Markdown document in your GitHub hack-2-shell repository. We will be sharing these answers with each other in class next week. If you get stuck on the problems above ask for help from your class mates on the gitter chatroom page.