---
image: /assets/images/hackers-panel.png
layout: default
title: markdown
---

## Markdown

**Table of Contents:**
* Table of contents
{:toc}

Markdown is a simple programming language used to write formatted text in HTML, the language of the web, but without the need to learn all of the tags involved in HTML. For example, to create large bold font like in the header above we could write it in HTML or markdown using the following code:

In HTML:

<h3> Markdown </h3>
<i>Markdown</i> is a simple programming language...

In Markdown:

## Markdown 
*Markdown* is a simple programming language...

Easy peazy.
Why use markdown?

Markdown is particularly useful for writing documentation of code files on github, since github automatically renders markdown documents into rendered (formatted) text. For example, this README me is written in markdown, which you can see by clicking on the "edit" button. You will be learning some of the basics of markdown so that you too can use it to format and submit homework assignments.
A markdown scratchpad

The easiest way to learn markdown is get your hands dirty and start writing. There are many online tools where markdown text is instantly rendered side-by-side with the code, which is great for testing. Try out the following page, https://stackedit.io/app and keep it handy for testing your markdown code while working on your assignments.
A markdown tutorial

You can reference the following cheat sheet: https://help.github.com/articles/basic-writing-and-formatting-syntax/

and test yourself on this tutorial: https://www.markdowntutorial.com/lesson/1/.
Formatting code block with markdown:

See here for how to format code block using markdown https://help.github.com/articles/creating-and-highlighting-code-blocks/. Try it out in the scratchpad above. Notice how if you change the name of the language the "syntax highlighting" can change slightly. Try the following code in the scratchpad and notice the difference when you change "language" to python, r, perl, or bash.

## this is a comment
x = 3
print(x)
z = "string"
y = (3 * 4) + 6
print(x + y, z);

You have now completed this tutorial

Continue to the final tutorial 3-Bash-Advanced to create a markdown file documenting the code you used to solve the problem set.