---
layout: default
image: /assets/images/hackers-2.jpg
title: learning-git
---

# Using branches with the `git` command line tool

## Learning objectives
By the end of this tutorial you should be familiar with 
the git branching workflow using the command line git program, and 
you will get more practice with basic git commands for adding, committing,
and pushing changes to a git repository. This tutorial will likely take
15-30 minutes to complete. 

## Branching

So what is the deal with branching? Branches are used to make changes
to a repo on a separate version that can exist alongside the main 
branch. This way you can test out new features while leaving the main
branch in working order. Imagine you are developing a complex new 
feature of a computer program, this might involve dozens or hundreds 
of commits, one for each time you make a substantial change to the code.
You can slowly develop this feature on a separate branch that will 
accumulate all of these commits. Meanwhile, maybe you also make some
completely separate changes on the main branch. Later, when the feature
branch is finished and has been tested you can merge it into the main
branch, at which point *all of the commits* on the feature branch will
be committed to main. The end product is exactly the same as if you
had never created the separate branch. Branching is only a convenience
that developers use for collaboration, or to work on multiple versions
of the code at the same time.

So, as I've said, you may not actually need to use branching for quite
some time. But let's walk through a quick example anyways just so you 
are familiar with it. Let's create a new branch called "feature". 
Try the following code, in order, and call `git status` at several 
points throughout to check in on what is happening with the files
or branch names being worked on.

```bash
# create a new branch called 'feature' and 
git branch feature

# switch to the new branch
git checkout branch

# make a change to an existing file.
echo "new text appended here." >> ./file-1.md

# stage the changes to this file
git add file-1.md

# commit the changes (this branch will be 1 commit ahead)
git commit -m "added appended message."

# we can now switch back to the main branch
git checkout main

# and merge the 'feature' branch into 'main'
git merge feature

# delete the feature branch (no longer needed)
git branch -d feature

# push the new changes on main to the remote (origin)
git push origin main
```

## Review and assessment

You've now seen two ways in which you can make changes to your 
local repo and push those changes to the remote on GitHub. The
first involves committing changes directly to your main branch, 
and overall just ignoring the branching process. This involves
only the three steps *add*, *commit*, and *push*. The second
alternative approach involves these same commands, but performs
them on a separately created branch that must be merged back into
the main branch.

In addition to these there are in fact many other 
ways in which you can use `git` to call these three steps. 
However, until you become very comfortable 
with this simple workflow I do not recommend trying to use
any other type of shortcut. Make sure you've *committed*
to memory the workflow: *add*, *commit*, *push*. 

### The GitHub Learning Lab
There are many great resources for learning git and its integration
with services like GitHub. One that I recommend is [https://github.com/apps/github-learning-lab](https://github.com/apps/github-learning-lab). Feel free to explore some of the free 
interactive courses that they offer for further training.


### Alternatives to the git command-line tool
Because learning the git command line tool is difficult, 
several alternatives have also been developed that incorporate
a graphical user interface, so that you do not need to use a 
shell or text editor at all. My belief is that you should 
first learn the command line framework to really understand 
how these commands work before you move to a more abstract 
form, otherwise you are likely to encounter problems, such as 
conflicts, and have a much harder time figuring out how to 
resolve them. 


### Assessment
Try to complete the following action by figuring out the appropriate
code to do so. This may be challenging, but all of the answers you 
need to complete the task are described above. 
Remember, git works like a time machine, so it is unlikely 
that you will mess anything up that cannot be 
undone. If you get a strange or unexpected message, try to google it
to find how to resolve it. And if you are still stuck, come visit
the course chatroom.

!!! alert 

	<b>Action:</b> Complete the following steps.<br>


1. Create a new file called `file-4.md` in your hack-2-shell/ directory
and write one of the following two messages in it about how you feel about
learning git: 'crazy confusing' or 'easy peazy'
2. call *git add* on `file-4.md` to add it to your staging area for commit.
3. call *git commit* to commit your changes with an informative message (-m ...).
4. call *git push* to push your changes to origin main.
5. Look on GitHub to make sure your changes have appeared.

For your grade we will look for this file with the appropriate contents in your hack-2-shell repo on GitHub.
