---
image: /assets/images/hackers-panel.png
layout: default
title: conda
---


# On Conda and Sand Mandalas


## What is conda?
[Conda](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/) is an open-source software management 
tool for installing software packages, as well as their dependencies, and 
creating sandboxed environments for executing code. Using the `conda` command
line tool you can use simple commands to search for software packages, select 
specific versions, and install them locally on your machine. This automated
process makes installing and removing software simple and reproducible which makes
it easier to design, distribute and use working software.


## Why use conda?
The many advantages of using conda include:

- **command-line convenience**: the conda command line program allows you to 
search for and install tools with simple commands that can even be written
as scripts for automation. This makes it easy to replicate the set of software
tools installed on one computer onto another machine. 

- **finding dependencies**: Almost every software program builds on and requires
other software packages as dependencies. Rather than telling a user to go 
find and install each of these dependencies on their own (a sure sign of 
a poorly developed tool by today's standards) a software package manager
can instead fetch and install of the dependencies for them. This might even
include different dependencies or versions depending on their specific operating
system. This is a very complex task and something conda does very well.

- **sandboxed directory**: conda installs software into a *sandboxed* location 
on your computer (usually a directory within HOME), which is done purposefully
to keep your conda software completely separate and isolated from your 
system-wide software (which is usually in /bin or /usr/bin). 
This gives you peace of mind to install, update, and remove packages as much
as you want inside of your conda directory without having to worry that it 
might ever impact your system programs. 

- **environments**: In addition to allowing you to install software programs into
a sandboxed location, conda also allows you to keep many separate *environments*,
where you can keep different sets of software or versions of them. This makes it easy 
to test software tools across different version of dependencies, or to keep 
software separate that uses different conflicting dependencies. 


## Install conda (miniconda3)
There are two main flavors of conda that you can install: Anaconda and 
Miniconda. Both include a version of Python and the conda program 
(which is written in Python) as well as a few dependencies of conda for
fetching information about packages online. However, the two flavors differ
in terms of which *other* tools come pre-loaded with these base resources.
Anaconda comes fully loaded with dozens of commonly used Python packages, 
whereas Miniconda in totally minimal, and doesn't come with anything extra
at all. I always recommend installing Miniconda, and then adding to it any
software that you want to install. 

To install Miniconda you can google search 'Miniconda install' and it will
point you to the following [miniconda install page](https://docs.anaconda.com/miniconda/install/).
Here you will see installation instructions different versions of Miniconda. First, 
there is a version for different operating systems (Window, MacOSX, Linux). 
If you are on a Mac then select from the Mac section, if you are on Linux
or Windows Subsystem for Linux then select the Linux version. **Do not install
the Windows version**. We can download and install conda directly from the command
line following these steps (be sure to choose the instructions for your OS):


=== "Linux/WSL2"

    ``` bash
    # cd to your HOME directory
    cd ~

    # download Miniconda installer
    wget https://repo.anaconda.com/miniconda/Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh

    # call bash to install conda from the .sh install script in 'batch' (auto) mode
    bash Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh -b

    # check that the miniconda3 folder now appears in HOME
    ls -l ~
    ```

=== "MacOSX"

    ``` bash
    # cd to your HOME directory
    cd ~

    # download Miniconda installer (if you have an older intel mac you will need
    # to use a different link by replacing `arm64` with `x86_64`)
    curl -O https://repo.anaconda.com/miniconda/Miniconda3-latest-MacOSX-arm64.sh

    # call bash to install conda from the .sh install script in 'batch' (auto) mode
    bash Miniconda3-latest-MacOSX-x86_64.sh -b

    # check that the miniconda3 folder now appears in HOME
    ls -l ~
    ```

When you execute the `bash` command above it will start running the installer
script. By default, this will select `~/miniconda3` as the location to install
conda and its associated folders. That's good. It should take a minute or less to finish.


## Adding `conda` to your PATH
At this point we have now created a new folder containing conda, but it is
not yet added to our PATH, meaning that we can't easily use this software
yet. Our goal here will be set the miniconda3/ directory at the front
of our PATH variable. This means that our shell will look here first for
any software, and only look in the other folders in the PATH for software
if it was not already found here. One specific reason this is useful is that
your shell will find this new version of Python (3.8) in Miniconda and use
it instead of some stodgy old system-wide version that is likely lurking 
deep in your computer somewhere. Before we proceed let's look at both the PATH
environment variable (to see where programs are being searched for), and alsowhich 
version of Python is currently set as your default (i.e., at the front 
of you PATH).

```bash
# Print the PATH environment variable
echo $PATH

# IF one is in your path this will show it.
which python

# this will show all versions of Python on your system
whereis python
```

Let's now add conda to your PATH by editing the dotfile (e.g., .bashrc)
in your HOME directory. While we could do this by hand, conda has 
developed a convenient script that can do it for us, and do it in kind
of a fancy way. So let's use this tool called `conda init`. To use it
we will need to provide the full path to the binary file since it is
not yet in our PATH. Run the command below and you should see an example
output similar to below.

```bash
~/miniconda3/condabin/conda init $SHELL
```
<pre class="stdout">
no change     /home/deren/miniconda3/condabin/conda
no change     /home/deren/miniconda3/bin/conda
no change     /home/deren/miniconda3/bin/conda-env
no change     /home/deren/miniconda3/bin/activate
no change     /home/deren/miniconda3/bin/deactivate
no change     /home/deren/miniconda3/etc/profile.d/conda.sh
no change     /home/deren/miniconda3/etc/fish/conf.d/conda.fish
no change     /home/deren/miniconda3/shell/condabin/Conda.psm1
no change     /home/deren/miniconda3/shell/condabin/conda-hook.ps1
no change     /home/deren/miniconda3/lib/python3.8/site-packages/xontrib/conda.xsh
no change     /home/deren/miniconda3/etc/profile.d/conda.csh
modified     /home/deren/.bashrc

==> For changes to take effect, close and re-open your current shell <==
</pre>

You can see that this edited the dotfile in my home directory. Remember, 
this is the file that is run every time you open a terminal which loads
a bunch of variables including the PATH where software is found and 
to set the style and colors of the prompt. When you run `conda init $SHELL`
it writes a new block at the end of the dotfile for your specific shell
 telling it to make your terminal aware of conda whenever it starts up. 
 If you wanted to stop it from doing this you would only need to remove that block of text 
from the dotfile. The code in this block does two things: 
(1) it tells your prompt to show the name of the conda environment; 
and (2) it adds the filepath of your miniconda3 directory to the front
of your PATH variable so that you can find all of the 
tools there. For this to go into effect close and reopen your terminal.

First let's check that the PATH has actually been modified, which should show
something like this:

```bash
echo $PATH
```
<pre class="stdout">
/home/jovyan/miniconda3/bin:/opt/conda/condabin:/opt/conda/bin:/usr/local/sbin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/sbin:/usr/bin:/sbin:/bin
</pre>

You can further test whether the `conda` command line tool is in your PATH
by typing the following command, which will print info about your conda
directory.

```bash
conda info
```
<pre class="stdout">
     active environment : base
    active env location : /home/deren/miniconda3
            shell level : 1
       user config file : /home/deren/.condarc
 populated config files : 
          conda version : 4.9.2
    conda-build version : not installed
         python version : 3.8.5.final.0
       virtual packages : __glibc=2.31=0
                          __unix=0=0
                          __archspec=1=x86_64
       base environment : /home/deren/miniconda3  (writable)
           channel URLs : https://repo.anaconda.com/pkgs/main/linux-64
                          https://repo.anaconda.com/pkgs/main/noarch
                          https://repo.anaconda.com/pkgs/r/linux-64
                          https://repo.anaconda.com/pkgs/r/noarch
          package cache : /home/deren/miniconda3/pkgs
                          /home/deren/.conda/pkgs
       envs directories : /home/deren/miniconda3/envs
                          /home/deren/.conda/envs
               platform : linux-64
             user-agent : conda/4.9.2 requests/2.25.1 CPython/3.8.5 Linux/5.8.0-38-generic ubuntu/20.04.1 glibc/2.31
                UID:GID : 1000:1000
             netrc file : None
           offline mode : False
</pre>

Let's also look again for where Python is installed on our system. We should
see a version of Python located in our miniconda3 directory at the front of 
the PATH:

```bash
# this should show the miniconda Python path
which python
```
<pre class="stdout">
/home/deren/miniconda3/bin/python
</pre>

!!! info

    Take note of this result. This is the path to the version of Python 
    that we will be using extensively throughout this course. It is located
    inside of your miniconda3/ directory, and then inside of a directory called
    bin/. This latter subdirectory is where all binaries (executable callable
    programs) installed by conda will be located.


## Using conda
The command line tool is called `conda`. This is a binary 
(executable program) written in Python and installed in your
miniconda directory. Because this directory is in your PATH the 
`conda` binary is also in your PATH. This is why you can call it 
from your terminal without needing to write the full path to the 
location of the binary. Let's try installing some other binaries
using conda. The syntax for installing a program with conda is
`conda {program_name} -c {channel_name}`. Try the example below:

```bash
conda install cowpy -c conda-forge
```

This installed a goofy Python program called cowsay that can be
used to make funny ASCII drawings in your terminal. Under the hood
it installed a Python package, and also a binary command line tool
that ships with this Python library. The Python library is installed
into `miniconda3/pkgs/` and the binary is installed into `miniconda3/bin/`
Let's try out the cowpy binary by writing some text in the terminal 
with `echo` and piping it to the `cowpy` program. For more details on the
cowpy program you can [find it on GitHub](https://github.com/jeffbuttars/cowpy)

```bash
echo "hello world" | cowpy
```

### Conda channels
Different software packages are found on different channels on conda. 
Channels are just big online folders where conda recipes are stored. 
Most software is available on one of three channels:
"default", "conda-forge", and "bioconda". The bioconda channel includes
many bioinformatics specific tools. The conda-forge channel contains the
cutting-edge versions of almost all software, and is very actively community 
maintained. The default channel is maintained by the anaconda organization, and 
tends to be a little out of date, and has the least software. You can find out 
which channel a software package is available on by googling `conda {software_name}`,
or by using the `anaconda-client` package to search all available channels.
Let's practice installing packages by installing `anaconda-client`. 

```bash
conda install -c conda-forge anaconda-client
```

Let's test it out by searching for `vcftools`, a commonly used tool for manipulating
VCF files ("variant call format") which are used primarily for SNP data.

```bash
# `anaconda` is the tool we can use for searching channels for software
anaconda search vcftools
```

<pre class="stdout">
anaconda search vcftools                                                                                                     
Using Anaconda API: https://api.anaconda.org                                                                                                               
Packages:                                                                                                                                                  
     Name                             |  Version | Package Types     | Platforms       | Builds                                                            
     -------------------------------- |   ------ | ----------------- | --------------- | ----------                                                        
     BioBuilds/vcftools               |   0.1.15 | Conda             | linux-64, osx-64, linux-ppc64le | pl522h7632db0_0, pl522h49bf30a_0, pl522hf9702e9_0, pl5.22.0_0                                                                                                                                                
     bioconda/gvcftools               |   0.17.0 | Conda             | linux-64, osx-64 | boost1.60_0, pl5.22.0_2, he941832_3, pl5.22.0_1                  
     bioconda/perl-vcftools-vcf       |   0.1.16 | Conda             | linux-64, osx-64, noarch | pl526_1, pl5321hdfd78af_4, pl526_2, pl526_0, 2, pl5.22.0_1, pl5.22.0_0, 3                                                                                                                                           
                                          : cpanm ready distribution of VCFtools Perl libraries                                                            
     bioconda/vcftools                |   0.1.16 | Conda             | linux-64, osx-64, linux-aarch64, osx-arm64 | 5, pl5321h1e84f2d_12, pl5321h6057758_11, pl5321h66d0458_8, pl5321hdcf5f25_11, h9a82719_5, h87af4ef_5, he860b03_3, 4, 0, pl526h8b12597_1, pl5321hdcf5f25_8, pl5321h7f4e536_11, pl5.22.0_2, 2, pl5321hd03093a_8, pl5321hda5e58c_12, he941832_2, pl526hdbcaa40_0, pl5321h6151dfb_7, pl5321h077b44d_12, pl5321hdcf5f25_10, pl5321hdcf5f25_9, he513fc3_4, pl5262hfd59bb5_2, ha92aebf_2, pl526hd174df1_1, h7475705_4, pl5321h447d7a5_11, pl5.22.0_1, pl5321hdf58011_9, pl526hd9629dc_0, pl5321h7f4e536_10, 1, pl5262h2e03b76_2, pl5321h87af4ef_6, pl5321hdf58011_10, pl5321hd03093a_7, pl5321h2ec61ea_12, pl5321h9a82719_6, pl5.22.0_0, pl5321h2e03b76_3, 3, h5c9b4e4_3                  
                                          : A set of tools written in Perl and C++ for working with VCF files. This package only contains the C++ libraries whereas the package perl-vcftools-vcf contains the perl libraries
     brown-data-science/vcftools      |   0.1.15 | Conda             | linux-64        | 1         
     compbiocore/perl-vcftools-vcf    |    0.840 | Conda             | linux-64        | pl526_1   
                                          : cpanm ready distribution of VCFtools Perl libraries
     compbiocore/vcftools             |   0.1.15 | Conda             | linux-64        | h1d3419f_0, 1
     pstey/vcftools                   |   0.1.15 | Conda             | linux-64        | 1         
Found 8 packages

Run 'anaconda show <USER/PACKAGE>' to get installation details
</pre>

Specifying `-c conda-forge` when we installed `anaconda-client` tells conda to search
for the package in this channel (rather than others). After years of using conda 
I strongly recommend setting the conda-forge channel as your default channel. Rather 
than typing in `conda install -c conda-forge <package>` every time (which is tedious), you can
set conda-forge as the default using `conda config`. This means that it will 
always look here first for a requested package or any of its dependencies, and 
only look at other channels after first looking here. This is a good thing. 

```bash
conda config --add channels conda-forge
```

Here we are setting a configuration preference. So how do you think that 
was done? That's right, it wrote it to a dotfile. In this case it simply
added the preferred conda channel order to a file called `~/.condarc`. 
Let's test this out by installing another package. Now we no longer 
need to tell it `-c conda-forge` since it will look there by default.
(Personally, I still usually write it anyways just out of habit, so 
you may see it in future instructions).

```bash
# install the Python 'requests' packages
conda install requests
```

And you can see that the order of channels to search through as been modified by our
change of the conda configuration.
<pre class="stdout">
Channels:
 - conda-forge
 - defaults
Platform: linux-64
</pre>

## Conda environments
In this class we will probably mostly use only the 'base' conda environment. 
However, you can create and load many separate conda environments, where each
contains a different isolated set of software. Let's go ahead and install
vcftools in a new, clean conda environment.

```bash
# create a new Python environment names 'vcftools' and activate it
conda create -n vcftools
conda activate vcftools
```

Notice that when you activate a new environment conda by default will change your 
command line prompt to indicate that you are now in the (vcftools) environment.
This is useful!

Now install vcftools in this new environment, remembering that when we searched
for vcftools earlier that we found it in the `bioconda` channel.

```bash
# Add -y to the command line to skip the prompt of whether to proceed with the install
conda install -c bioconda vcftools -y
```

After the install completes you can test to verify that vcftools is installed.

```bash
vcftools --version
```
<pre class="stdout">
VCFtools (0.1.16)
</pre>

Also, take a look at your PATH environment variable. Conda is manipulating this behind
the scenes to isolate installed packages within the environments you specify.

```
echo $PATH
```
<pre class="stdout">
/home/jovyan/miniconda3/envs/vcftools/bin:/opt/conda/condabin:/opt/conda/bin:/usr/local/sbin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/sbin:/usr/bin:/sbin:/bin
</pre>

Notice that the first element of the PATH is now `~/miniconda3/envs/vcftools/bin`.

Switch back to the base conda environment.
```bash
conda activate base

#Another alternative is to 'deactivate' the current environment, which will
#fall back to the previous environment by default.
conda deactivate
```

When you switch back to `base` two things happen: 1) The prompt changes again to reflect
that you are back in the (base) environment; and 2) your PATH also changes, which you can
verify:

```bash
echo $PATH
```
<pre class="stdout">
/home/jovyan/miniconda3/bin:/opt/conda/condabin:/opt/conda/bin:/usr/local/sbin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/sbin:/usr/bin:/sbin:/bin
</pre>

Verify that vcftools is indeed no longer available in the base environment:
```bash
which vcftools
```

Right now you only have two environments, so it's not hard to remember which is which,
but if you are doing lots of data science you might have numerous environments for all the
different analytical tools in your toolkit. You can see which environments are available to you
by asking conda to `list` them.

```bash
conda env list
```

<pre class="stdout">
base                  *  /home/deren/miniconda3
vcftools                      /home/deren/miniconda3/envs/vcftools
</pre>

On my machine I have lots of conda environments, so my output looks like this:

<pre class="stdout">
# conda environments:
#
base                     /Users/isaac/miniconda3
PTA                      /Users/isaac/miniconda3/envs/PTA
bart                     /Users/isaac/miniconda3/envs/bart
bci                      /Users/isaac/miniconda3/envs/bci
ee                    *  /Users/isaac/miniconda3/envs/ee
ipyrad                   /Users/isaac/miniconda3/envs/ipyrad
mess                     /Users/isaac/miniconda3/envs/mess
tmp                      /Users/isaac/miniconda3/envs/tmp
</pre>


## The purposeful impermanence of conda
In Tibetan Buddhism there is a tradition involving the creation of 
large complex mosaic [*mandalas*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sand_mandala)
carefully constructed from colored sand, often involving many weeks of work. 
Upon completion of the artwork it is then destroyed. This meditative exercise 
is intended to make one reflect on the impermanence of life, and to experience
the act of letting go.

The sand mandala tradition has a lot to teach us about our relationships
with our conda software directory. You may feel that after working with 
conda for several weeks that you have installed the perfect set of software
tools that includes everything you will ever need. And you become very 
attached to it. But, you should feel free to let it go. 

Software becomes outdated quickly, and updating many many software packages to new
versions can sometimes conflict with other programs in your environment to cause problems.
Usually conda can fix these problems and find the right versions that work
together. But in some cases it can't. It simply worked itself into a corner
where it basically needs to uninstall and reinstall everything again. This is
the point when you should consider destroying it.


### Remove a conda environment
You can remove a specific environment by name, if you are no longer using it.
```bash
conda env remove -n vcftools
```

Check that this indeed removed your vcftools environment:
```bash
conda env list
```
<pre class="stdout">
# conda environments:
#
base                 * /home/jovyan/miniconda3
</pre>

### Remove the entire conda directory
Or, you can also remove the entire conda directory altogether.
Remember, we just installed it above, and took just a single command. It's very 
fast and easy. To remove the conda directory you can use the `rm` command along 
with the options `-r` and `-f`. 
The `-r` option tells it that the thing we want to remove is a 
folder. The `-f` command means 'force'. This is a slightly dangerous command 
if you were to tell it to delete something that you shouldn't. So take care that
the file path after this command is the one that you actually want to remove
and not something else (like your entire filesystem). 

```bash
# this command would remove your conda directory completely
# rm -rf ~/miniconda3
```

## Practice creating environments and installing software
For the next exercise you'll practice creating new environments, installing software,
changing environments, and removing environments.

* Create a new conda environment called `bedtools`
* Change to this new environment and verify that your PATH has changed
* Install bedtools from the bioconda channel
* Verify that bedtools is installed: `bedtools --version`
* Deactivate the bedtools environment
* Check that bedtools is no longer available
* Create a new environment called `msprime` and activate it
* Install msprime from the conda-forge channel
* Check that it is installed with `msp -V`
* Activate the base environment
* Verify your current PATH and check that bedtools and msp are not available here
* Remove the `bedtools` and `msprime` environments
* Blow away your entire conda install with `rm -rf ~/miniconda3`
* Reinstall miniconda following the directions above
* In the new clean conda base environment install anaconda-client
* Now you're ready for the next exercise
