---
image: /assets/images/hackers-panel.png
layout: default
title: Implementing the Wright-Fisher Model as a Class
---

## Wrapping our Wright-Fisher simulator in a Class
In previous sessions we implemented the [Wright-Fisher (WF) model](../6.1-microproject-wf) 
using a few simple python functions. This works great for running a few simulations by hand,
but for projects of even modest complexity this 'flat' structure of unorganized function calls
can quickly become very difficult to understand or operate. In this session we will convert the
WF model into a python 'Class' which is a structured way to organize data and code.

### A word about Object Oriented programming
Object Oriented programming (OOP) is based on the idea that we can structure our computer
programs in a more natural way that aligns with how we interact with everyday 'things'.
In OOP we define 'Classes' of objects, and these classes encapsulate attributes and functions
that define how we interact with them. Here is a cartoon example of how Classes can usefully
encapsulate functions and help us organize our interactions.

Let us assume that we are interested in "dressing" things, so we will define a function called `dress()`.
If we make a salad it's easy to see how we could define a procedure to `dress(salad)`, you just pour
it on. However, after you eat the salad and your baby wakes up from a nap, it's time to `dress()` the 
baby. We probably would want an entirely different procedure for this! Without OOP we would need to do 
something like this:

```python
def dress(thing_to_dress):
    if thing_to_dress == "Caesar":
        # Pour the dressing on
    elif thing_to_dress == "Cupie": # <- The baby's name
        # Put on the bonnet and onesie
    else:
        print("I don't know how to dress that.")
```
Hopefully it is obvious that as the number of things you want to dress increases, the size
of this function will grow, and also the logic for how to interact with these very different
things will get all tangled up.

**With OOP** we can encapsulate the logic of how to `dress()` something inside a 'class method'.
This has numerous benefits, most importantly that you won't accidentally cover your
baby with ranch.

!!! alert
    For now ignore the `self` argument to the `dress()` methods. This is a formal requirement of python class methods that we will explain in a moment.

```python
class Baby:
    def dress(self):
        print("Dress the baby")

class Salad:
    def dress(self):
        print("Dress the salad")

b = Baby()
b.dress()
```
```
Dress the baby
```

## Assignment instructions

1. Launch a jupyter server on your local computer
2. Navigate to `~/hacks/hack-5-python/notebooks` directory and open your `wf-sim.ipynb` notebook
3. At the top of your notebook make sure that you have a cell that calls `import random`, we will need
this for the future.
4. In this exercise we will define a new class to implement the WF simulation using the functions
we defined previously.

### Class definition and the `class` keyword

The `class` keyword indicates to python your intention to define a new class. Choosing the name
of classes is important for reducing the cognitive burden of understanding and manipulating your code.
It might be tempting to call our new class `WF` because this is the name of the model, but this
conflates the 'object' that we want to manipulate (which is the population), with the process that
we want to implement (the discrete time, birth/death process with non-overlapping generations). Let's
call our class 'Population' because this more precisely captures the object-ness of the concept we
want to represent.

```python
class Population:
    pass
```
That's it, you have defined your first python class. You can instantiate a new `Population` object,
but it doesn't do much yet because `pass` is a python keyword that means "don't do anything". 

```python
p = Population()
```

### Initializing class attributes with the `__init__()` method

Recall that when we defined the `init()` function for our WF model we specified two required
arguments: `N` as the size of the population in number of individuals, and `f` as the frequency
of the derived allele. Let's maintain this requirement in our `Population` class, and we can
do this by defining the `__init__()` method, which is a special class method called upon
class instantiation (when you create an instance of a new class).

```python
class Population:
    def __init__(self, N, f):
        self.N = N
        self.f = f

        derived_count = round(N*f)
        self.pop = [0] * (N - derived_count) + [1] * derived_count
```
Like all class methods (functions that reside within and operate on classes), the `__init__()` method 
is declared with an explicit first argument representing the object which is canonically and universally
called `self`. This argument is provided implicitly by the call to a given class method. It is
confusing at first, but you will get the hang of it.

In this `__init__()` method we do a few things. First we define the `self.N` and `self.f` attributes
and set them equal to the passed in values. Then we copy in the code from our previous `init()` function
and define another class attribute called `self.pop` to contain our list of ancestral (0) and derived (1)
alleles.

What happens when you try to instantiate a new instance of this `Population()` class without passing
arguments? In this case you do get a helpful error message:

```python
p = Population()
```
```python
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
TypeError                                 Traceback (most recent call last)
Cell In[10], line 5
      3         self.N = N
      4         self.f = f
----> 5 p = Population()

TypeError: Population.__init__() missing 2 required positional arguments: 'N' and 'f'
```

Because we specified two arguments without defaults to the `__init__()` method, the `Population`
class knows that these are required and forbids creating new instances without passing these
arguments. We have two options here: 1) Pass in values for `N` and `f`; or 2) Set 'reasonable'
default values. Reasonable default values are helpful in many cases, so let's do it that way.

```python
class Population:
    def __init__(self, N=10, f=0.2):
        self.N = N
        self.f = f

        derived_count = round(N*f)
        self.pop = [0] * (N - derived_count) + [1] * derived_count

p = Population()
print(f"N={p.N} f={p.f}")
```
```
N=10 f=0.2
```

Now we can create a new `Population` instance without passing arguments, and it will 
take the default values, if we don't specify alternate values.

### Creating printable representations of an object with `__repr__()`

It's often useful (and good practice) to allow objects to be printed to the
screen in a meaningful way. In the previous code we had to format our own string
representation of the `Population` object (which we assigned to the variable `p`) and 
this is annoying if you have to do it many times. Python classes have another special 
method called `__repr__()` which you may define to provide functionality to print objects 
in a human readable way. If you define `__repr__()` then this method is invoked when an 
object is evaluated or when it is passed to `print()`.

```python
class Population:
    def __init__(self, N=10, f=0.2):
        self.N = N
        self.f = f

        derived_count = round(N*f)
        self.pop = [0] * (N - derived_count) + [1] * derived_count

    def __repr__(self):
        return f"Population(N={self.N}, f={self.f})"

p = Population()
p
```
```
Population(N=10, f=0.2)
```

### Defining a class method to implement the WF `step()` function
Recall that our previous implementation of the WF function took several arguments
in the form of `wf(N, f, ngens)` and that it internally called the `init()` and
`step()` functions. Because our `Population` class is aware of `N` and `f`
we can simplify things by condensing the argument list for the `Population.step()`
method to include only the `ngens` parameter. Notice that we gain additional benefits of
simplification here because of the encapsulation of the `N`, `f`, and `pop` member
attributes of the `Population` object.

```python
class Population:
    def __init__(self, N=10, f=0.2):
        self.N = N
        self.f = f

        derived_count = round(N*f)
        self.pop = [0] * (N - derived_count) + [1] * derived_count

    def __repr__(self):
        return f"Population(N={self.N}, f={self.f})"

    def step(self, ngens=1):
        for i in range(ngens):
            self.pop = random.choices(self.pop, k=len(self.pop))
```

Now with our `Population` class defined, we can access all the code that we had previously
called using many different functions in a very simple way:
```python
p = Population()
p.step(ngens=10)
p.pop
```
```
[0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 0]
```

### Searching for efficiencies in code

When we originally defined the `step()` function we only passed in the `pop` argument
which was the list of ancestral and derived alleles. Because our original `step()` function
didn't know anything about this pop we had to calculate `len(pop)` to set the value for
the `k` argument for `random.choices()`. This is wildly inefficient, as we *know* the size
of the population is fixed and constant for a given simulation, so we are needlessly recalculating
`len(self.pop)` over and over again. We can take advantage of the `N` attribute of the `Population`
object to release ourselves from having to do this pointless recalculation.

```python
class Population:
    def __init__(self, N=10, f=0.2):
        self.N = N
        self.f = f

        derived_count = round(N*f)
        self.pop = [0] * (N - derived_count) + [1] * derived_count

    def __repr__(self):
        return f"Population(N={self.N}, f={self.f})"

    def step(self, ngens=1):
        for i in range(ngens):
            self.pop = random.choices(self.pop, k=self.N)
```

And we can use a special jupyter 'magic' command to time the difference between class attribute
access (`p.N`) and the length calculation (`len(p.pop)`). The `%%timeit` magic command is placed
at the beginning of a jupyter notebook cell to evaluate performance of the code inside a cell.
By default it will run several iterations of the code to calculate runtime (but this can be
modified by including information about how many iterations you want to run, e.g. `%%timeit -n 2`).

```python
# Make the population large to evaluate performance for large populations
p = Population(1000000000)
```

```python
%%timeit
p.N
```
```
27.9 ns ± 0.0758 ns per loop (mean ± std. dev. of 7 runs, 10,000,000 loops each)
```

```
%%timeit
len(p.pop)
```
```
60.7 ns ± 1.32 ns per loop (mean ± std. dev. of 7 runs, 10,000,000 loops each)
```

More than twice as fast with this small modification!


## Further challenges if time remains
1. Create a new `isMonomorphic()` method for your `Population()` class to test whether the population
is fixed for either the ancestral or derived state. This method should return `True` if the population
is monomorphic for either the ancestral or derived state, and `False` otherwise.
2. Modify your `step()` method to test for fixation with the `isMonomorphic()` method and terminate
further execution if the test passes. You will need to use conditional branching and the `break` keyword
in the case that fixation has happened. 
3. Track allele frequencies through time. Create a new attribute of the `Population` class called `freqs`
inside the `__init__()` method. This attribute should be an empty list to begin with (e.g. `[]`), and
it should be updated within the for loop of the `step()` method to append the current frequency
of the derived allele.

## Wrap-up
- Add, commit, and push changes back to your `origin main` copy of the repo.
