---
image: /assets/images/hackers-panel.png
title: "black style"
layout: default
---



<style>
h3 {
    margin-top: 30px
}
pre {
    line-height: 1.5em;
}
pre code {
    font-size: 0.9em;
}
</style>


## Python linters

### Learning objectives:
By the end of this tutorial you should:
- Understand why using a style guide is a good idea
- Be familiar with the 'black' style guide for Python.
- Be able to implement 'black' on your code from a shell.


### Install some linters
Let's start with installing the `pycodestyle`, `pylint` and `black` linters.

```bash
conda install pycodestyle pylint black -c conda-forge
```

### Reading 
Please read the following short article about *why* using a style guide is a good idea.
- [Why use a style guide (JS)](https://prettier.io/docs/en/why-prettier.html)

Then read the following articles which introduce <b>black</b>, and why you should use
it as your preferred style. (I do not necessary promote this as the best style guide, 
personally I use pylint, but I think black is good to know about.)
- [Black code style](https://github.com/psf/black/blob/master/docs/the_black_code_style.md)
<!-- - [Black's dogma](http://www.locallyoptimal.com/blog/2019/08/23/why-you-should-use-black-for-your-python-style-linting/) -->


### Implementing black
Unlike other linters that we will learn about, black is intended *not to be modified*, 
in other words, if you use black you are expected to accept all of its recommendations.
For this reason, it doesn't really function as a *recommender*, but moreso as an 
*implementer*. It can make changes directly to your Python files to fix the style
errors that it finds. Personally, I find this a little obtrusive, so I always first 
run it with the argument `--diff`, which will show you the changes it intends to make 
without actually making them. It's sort of a dry run. 

Let's try this on a few example files from a public repository. Use the commands below
to clone two repos into your `~/hacks` directory. We will not bother forking the repos
this time, since we do not intend to push the changes we will make to these files back
to the origin repos.

```bash
cd ~/hacks/
git clone https://github.com/rajanil/fastStructure
git clone https://github.com/eaton-lab/toytree/
```

Let's start by running black on one of the main scripts in the fastStructure package.
This is a tool that was published about 6 years ago, so its a bit outdated now, but 
still in common use. It is written in Python2.7, and impressively black is able to 
recognize this and propose changes to the code style. Here I run it using the 
`--diff` option. 

The format of this output is called a `diff`, it is showing the differences 
between the original file and the file that black
*would have made* if it had been allowed to overwrite the original file (i.e., if we
hadn't used the --diff arg). On the left side of each line it shows a minus or plus
sign. The minus lines are from the old file, and the plus lines are showing what
would replace the old lines. In some cases it may look like no change was made, 
this usually means that the difference has to do with the whitespace, for example, 
by removing extra spaces at the ends of lines.

```bash
black --diff fastStructure/structure.py
```


### Pylint
Running this first example below will encounter an error and STOP 
when run on the structure.py script, since the script cannot successfully execute
in its current mode. The terminal error in this case is caused by the fact 
that pylint uses your *current Python* version to test for errors, and this
script is written in Python2, whereas we are testing in Python3. 
It raises an error saying that the print function is being called 
incorrectly. This is a common error-producing difference between py2/3. 
This is fine, good to know, we'll continue to the next example.
```bash
pylint fastStructure/structure.py
```

Now let's run pylint on some code that is written to work in either Python
2 or Python 3. Writing code in this way is kind of a pain, but is worth it 
for big general use packages. The Python package Toytree is an example. 
You can see in this example that pylint finishes running and reports a score
of 7.26/10. Not bad. It has several recommendations having to do with 
mundane style (extra whitespace), but also some useful suggestions for cleaner
code, like "unnecessary else after break". If we were to edit the files 
at the suggested lines to implement these suggestions, and rerun pylint, 
it should return improved scores until it reaches 10/10.
```bash
pylint toytree/toytree/Rooter.py
```

You can see that pycodestyle makes similar recommendations as pylint, but fewer,
mostly having to do with things of little consequence (extra whitespace or variable names).
It does run quite a bit faster though, which is convenient for when the linter is 
running automatically in the background of your code editor (as we'll see later).
```bash
pycodestyle toytree/toytree/Rooter.py
```

Finally, let's run black. Studying the output of the --diff command to black can be 
really insightful about what the actual solutions are to the many recommendations
that were provided by pylint above. 
```bash
black --diff toytree/toytree/Rooter.py
```

### Assessment
None. Continue to the next tutorials where we will continue to learn about style.


### Cleanup
Now that you've finished the exercise you can cleanup by removing the repos
that we had cloned only for this example. Remember, to remove a git repo you
will need to use the arguments `-rf`; this is because the .git/ subfolder 
in the repo wants you to be sure you really want to remove it before you do 
so. Here we are quite sure, so go ahead and run the commands below to remove
both folders.

```bash
# move into your hacks directory
cd ~/hacks

# rm the two repos
rm -rf ./toytree
rm -rf ./fastStructure
```