---
image: /assets/images/hackers-panel.png
title: moving to scripting
layout: default
---


### Getting started with scripting in Python


### Learning objectives
By the end of this tutorial you should:

- Understand the basic building-blocks of a python script
- Understand how the `__main__` keyword defines the behavior of the script
- Be able to use `argparse` to allow scripts to accept arguments of different kinds.
- Use `print` statements for simple debugging

### What is a script?
A script is just a text file that contains computer code. Python scripts should end 
with `.py`. Python scripts are executable at the command line, and this makes them
very useful for developing bioinformatics tools. Let's see how scripts are developed.

### Hello world, the simplest example script

Here is the simplest executable python script (which I will call `myFirstScript.py`).
```python
#!/usr/bin/env python

if __name__ == "__main__":
    print("Hello world")
```

You can probably guess what this script does, but you can try running it yourself
on the command line: `python myFirstScript.py`.

What makes this script executable is the funny looking `if __name__ == "__main__"`
conditional test. Everything inside this if statement is run when the code
is executed at the command line.

### Adding imports and functions
Lets add a bit of functionality to generate a random password of a given length.
We'll need the `string` and `random` from the standard library, so we'll import
those at the top (as usual).

Now we write a new function inside our script called `random_password` which
accepts 1 argument, being the length of the password, and we call this
function from inside the `__main__` block.
```python
#!/usr/bin/env python

import random
import string

def random_password(length=10):
    # Define the set of available characters to sample from
    chars = string.ascii_letters + string.digits + string.punctuation

    # Generate a sample from this list
    password = random.choices(chars, k=length)

    # password is a list of characters here so `join` them together into
    # a string
    return "".join(password)

if __name__ == "__main__":
    print(random_password())
```

### Adding flexibility with arguments
This is great because the passwords look strong, but what if you want
to generate passwords of different lengths? The `argparse` module
gives you a powerful way of adding command line arguments to your python
scripts. Let's import it at the top of the file (Note: `imports` are
*normally* sorted alphabetically, unless you have a good reason not to).

```python
#!/usr/bin/env python

import argparse
import random
import string

def random_password(length=10):
    chars = string.ascii_letters + string.digits + string.punctuation
    password = random.choices(chars, k=length)
    return "".join(password)

if __name__ == "__main__":
    parser = argparse.ArgumentParser()
    parser.add_argument("-l", help="Password length in characters", 
                        dest='length', type=int, default=10)
    args = parser.parse_args()

    print(random_password(length=args.length))
```

There are 3 things happening here, most of the action is in the second part (adding
new arguments to the parser):

- You create the `parser` object
- You add arguments to the `parser`, which themselves can take many different arguments
- You call `parse_args()` to return a dictionary-like object containing data for the
arguments specified.


When declaring arguments there can be few or many argument parameters. In the above example
these were:

- `-l`: The command line flag to identify this argument
- `help`: The help message to print for argument usage
- `dest`: The *destination* variable for the value of this argument (notice
that we access the value as `args.length`)
- `type`: The `int` type directs argparse to cast the value to an integer
- `default`: Set the default value, in the case no value is passed in for this
argument. If no default is set then the command line will complain about missing
required values.

Here's another nice thing argparse does for you. It automatically generates a helpful 
help message when `-h` is passed in at the command line, e.g.:

```
$ python myFirstScript.py -h
usage: myFirstScript.py [-h] [-l L]

options:
  -h, --help  show this help message and exit
  -l L        Password length in characters
```

### Providing helpful information with `verbose`
It's very common for command line programs to have a flag for increasing
the verbosity (printing more progress messages). This can also be very
helpful for debugging programs, as it allows you to toggle how much or how
little your program is communicating to you (which, if it is working fine
you probably want it to communicate very little besides the target output).

```python
#!/usr/bin/env python

import argparse
import random
import string

def random_password(length=10, verbose=False):
    if args.verbose:
        print(f"Generating password length: {length}")
    chars = string.ascii_letters + string.digits + string.punctuation
    password = random.choices(chars, k=length)
    return "".join(password)

if __name__ == "__main__":
    parser = argparse.ArgumentParser()
    parser.add_argument("-l", help="Password length in characters", 
                        dest='length', type=int, default=10)
    parser.add_argument("-v", "--verbose", help="increase output verbosity",
                    action="store_true")
    args = parser.parse_args()

    if args.verbose:
        print(args)

    print(random_password(length=args.length, verbose=args.verbose))
```

Above we added one more argument now called `verbose`. Here we are doing a couple
things different: We specify that it can be invoked either as `-v` or as
`--verbose`, and we now tell it to `action="store_true"`. The `store_true`
action sets the value of `verbose` to True if it is invoked, and False
otherwise.

The other thing we did is to propagate the `verbose` argument into the
`random_password` function, so that we can also toggle verbosity
inside this function. This is a very common practice in python scripts.

Check the help message of the new function:
```
$ python myFirstScript.py -h
usage: myFirstScript.py [-h] [-l LENGTH] [-v]

options:
  -h, --help     show this help message and exit
  -l LENGTH      Password length in characters
  -v, --verbose  increase output verbosity
```

And check the output with the new arguments:
```
$ python myFirstScript.py -v -l 30
Namespace(length=30, verbose=True)
Generating password length: 30
;GCM5y20>s+^zOF~QG,M@A+80N[6;#
```
